<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-1-1" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>London. A room of state in the palace.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, attended; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince of Whales</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b>, and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Robert of Artois, banish’d though thou be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From France, thy native country, yet with us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt retain as great a signiory;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For we create thee Earl of Richmond here.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now go forwards with our pedigree;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who next succeeded Philip Le Beau?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Three sons of his; which all, successfully,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did sit upon their father’s regal throne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet died and left no issue of their loins.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>But was my mother sister unto those?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She was, my lord; and only Isabel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was all the daughters that this Philip had:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom afterward your father took to wife;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from the fragrant garden of her womb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your gracious self, the flower of Europe’s hope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Derived is inheritor to France.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But note the rancour of rebellious minds.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thus the lineage of Le Beau was out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The French obscur’d your mother’s privilege;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, though she were the next of blood, proclaim’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>John, of the house of Valois, now their king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The reason was, they say, the realm of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Replete with princes of great parentage,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ought not admit a governor to rule</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Except he be descended of the male;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that’s the special ground of their contempt</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wherewith they study to exclude your grace:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But they shall find that forged ground of theirs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be but dusty heaps of brittle sand.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perhaps it will be thought a heinous thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I, a Frenchman, should discover this:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But Heaven I call to record of my vows;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is not hate nor any private wrong,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But love unto my country and the right,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Provokes my tongue thus lavish in report:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You are the lineal watchman of our peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And John of Valois indirectly climbs:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What then should subjects, but embrace their king?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wherein may our duty more be seen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than striving to rebate a tyrant’s pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And place the true shepherd of our commonwealth?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This counsel, Artois, like to fruitful showers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath added growth unto my dignity:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, by the fiery vigour of thy words,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hot courage is engender’d in my breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which heretofore was rack’d in ignorance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But now doth mount with golden wings of fame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will approve fair Isabel’s descent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Able to yoke their stubborn necks with steel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That spurn against my sovereignty in France.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sound a horn.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>A messenger?⁠—Lord Audley, know from whence. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, and returns.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The Duke of Lorraine, having cross’d the seas,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Entreats he may have conference with your highness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Admit him, lords, that we may hear the news.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lords</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b> takes his state.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lords</b>; with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</b>, attended.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Say, Duke of Lorraine, wherefore art thou come?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The most renowned prince, King John of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth greet thee, Edward: and by me commands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, for so much as by his liberal gift</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Guyenne dukedom is entail’d to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou do him lowly homage for the same:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for that purpose, here I summon thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Repair to France within these forty days,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That there, according as the custom is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou may’st be sworn true liegeman to our king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, else, thy title in that province dies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he himself will repossess the place.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>See, how occasion laughs me in the face!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No sooner minded to prepare for France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But straight I am invited, nay, with threats,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon a penalty, enjoin’d to come:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twere but a childish part to say him nay.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lorraine, return this answer to thy lord:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I mean to visit him, as he requests;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But how? not servilely dispos’d to bend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But like a conqueror to make him bow.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His lame unpolish’d shifts are come to light,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And truth hath pull’d the vizard from his face</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That set a gloss upon his arrogance.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dare he command a fealty in me?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell him, the crown, that he usurps, is mine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And where he sets his foot, he ought to kneel:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis not a petty dukedom that I claim,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all the whole dominions of the realm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which if with grudging he refuse to yield,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll take away those borrow’d plumes of his</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And send him naked to the wilderness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, Edward, here, in spite of all thy lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I do pronounce defiance to thy face.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Defiance, Frenchman? we rebound it back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even to the bottom of thy master’s throat:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And⁠—be it spoke with reverence of the king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gracious father, and these other lords.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hold thy message but as scurrilous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And him that sent thee, like the lazy drone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Crept up by stealth unto the eagle’s nest;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whence we’ll shake him with so rough a storm,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As others shall be warned by his harm.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Bid him leave of the lion’s case he wears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest, meeting with the lion in the field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He chance to tear him piecemeal for his pride.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The soundest counsel I can give his grace</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is to surrender ere he be constrain’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A voluntary mischief hath less scorn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than when reproach with violence is borne.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Degenerate traitor, viper to the place</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where thou was foster’d in thine infancy, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drawing his sword.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bear’st thou a part in this conspiracy?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lorraine, behold the sharpness of this steel: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drawing his.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fervent desire, that sits against my heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is far more thorny-pricking than this blade;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, with the nightingale, I shall be scar’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As oft as I dispose my self to rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until my colours be display’d in France.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is thy final answer; so be gone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is not that, nor any English brave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Afflicts me so, as doth his poison’d view,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is most false, should most of all be true. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</b> and Train.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, lords, our fleeting bark is under sail:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our gage is thrown, and war is soon begun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not so quickly brought unto an end.⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sir William Mountague</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But wherefore comes Sir William Mountague?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How stands the league between the Scot and us?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mountague</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Crack’d and dissever’d, my renowned lord.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The treacherous king no sooner was inform’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of your withdrawing of our army back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But straight, forgetting of his former oath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He made invasion on the bordering towns.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Berwick is won; Newcastle spoil’d and lost;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now the tyrant hath begirt with siege</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The castle of Roxborough, where enclos’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Countess Salisbury is like to perish.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That is thy daughter, Warwick⁠—is it not?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose husband hath in Britain serv’d so long,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>About the planting of Lord Mountford there?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>It is, my lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ignoble David! hast thou none to grieve,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But silly ladies, with thy threat’ning arms?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I will make you shrink your snaily horns.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, therefore, Audley, this shall be thy charge;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go levy footmen for our wars in France:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Ned, take muster of our men at arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In every shire elect a several band.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let them be soldiers of a lusty spirit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such as dread nothing but dishonour’s blot:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be wary therefore; since we do commence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A famous war and with so mighty a nation.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Derby, be thou ambassador for us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto our father-in-law, the Earl of Hainault:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make him acquainted with our enterprise;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And likewise will him, with our own allies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That are in Flanders, to solicit too</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Emperour of Almaine in our name.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself, whilst you are jointly thus employ’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will, with these forces that I have at hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>March and once more repulse the trait’rous Scot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, sirs, be resolute; we shall have wars</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On every side; and, Ned, thou must begin</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now to forget thy study and thy books</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ure thy shoulders to an armour’s weight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As cheerful sounding to my youthful spleen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This tumult is of war’s increasing broils,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As at the coronation of a king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The joyful clamours of the people are</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When, “Ave, Caesar!” they pronounce aloud.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within this school of honour I shall learn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either to sacrifice my foes to death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or in a rightful quarrel spend my breath.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then cheerfully forward, each a several way;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In great affairs ’tis naught to use delay. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-1-2" epub:type="z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Roxborough. Before the castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess of Salisbury</b>, and certain of her People, upon the walls.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Alas, how much in vain my poor eyes gaze</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For succour that my sovereign should send!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, cousin Mountague, I fear, thou want’st</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lively spirit sharply to solicit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With vehement suit the king in my behalf:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou dost not tell him, what a grief it is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be the scornful captive of a Scot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either to be woo’d with broad untuned oaths,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or forc’d by rough insulting barbarism:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou dost not tell him, if he here prevail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How much they will deride us in the north;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in their wild, uncivil, skipping jigs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bray forth their conquest and our overthrow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even in the barren, bleak, and fruitless air.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</b> and Forces; with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</b>, and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I must withdraw; the everlasting foe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comes to the wall: I’ll closely step aside,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And list their babble, blunt and full of pride. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Retiring behind the works.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My Lord of Lorraine, to our brother of France</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commend us, as the man in Christendom</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we most reverence and entirely love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Touching your embassage, return and say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we with England will not enter parley</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor never make fair weather or take truce,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But burn their neighbour towns, and so persist</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With eager roads beyond their city York.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never shall our bonny riders rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor rusting canker have the time to eat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their light-borne snaffles nor their nimble spurs;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor lay aside their jacks of gymold mail;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor hang their staves of grained Scottish ash</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In peaceful wise upon their city walls;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor from their button’d tawny leathern belts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dismiss their biting whinyards, till your king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cry out, Enough; spare England now for pity.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Farewell, and tell him, that you leave us here</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before this castle; say, you came from us</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Even when we had that yielded to our hands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I take my leave, and fairly will return</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your acceptable greeting to my king. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, Douglas, to our former task again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For the division of this certain spoil.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</td>
							<td>My liege, I crave the lady, and no more.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, soft ye, sir, first I must make my choice;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And first I do bespeak her for myself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</td>
							<td>Why, then, my liege, let me enjoy her jewels.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Those are her own, still liable to her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, who inherits her, hath those withal.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>, hastily.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My liege, as we were pricking on the hills,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To fetch in booty, marching hitherward</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We might descry a might host of men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sun, reflecting on the armour, show’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A field of plate, a wood of pikes advanc’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bethink your highness speedily herein.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An easy march within four hours will bring</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The hindmost rank unto this place, my liege.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td>Dislodge, dislodge, it is the King of England.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</td>
							<td>Jemmy my man, saddle my bonny black.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td>Mean’st thou to fight? Douglas, we are too weak.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Douglas</td>
							<td>I know it well, my liege, and therefore fly.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td>My lords of Scotland, will ye stay and drink? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising from her concealment.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td>She mocks at us; Douglas, I can’t endure it.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Say, good my lord, which is he, must have the lady,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And which, her jewels? I am sure, my lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ye will not hence, till you have shar’d the spoils.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She heard the messenger and heard our talk;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now that comfort makes her scorn at us.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter another <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
							<td>Arm, my good lord! O, we are all surpris’d!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>After the French ambassador, my liege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell him that you dare not ride to York;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Excuse it, that your bonny horse is lame.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She heard that too; intolerable grief!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Woman, farewell: although I do not stay⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt Scots.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis not for fear⁠—and yet you run away.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O happy comfort, welcome to our house!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The confident and boist’rous boasting Scot⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That swore before my walls, they would not back</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For all the armed power of this land⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With faceless fear that ever turns his back,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn’d hence again the blasting north-east wind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the bare report and name of arms.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mountague</b>, and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>O summer’s day! see where my cousin comes.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mountague</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How fares my aunt? Why, aunt,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> we are not Scots;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why do you shut your gates against your friends?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well may I give a welcome, cousin, to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For thou com’st well to chase my foes from hence.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mountague</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The king himself is come in person hither;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dear aunt, descend, and gratulate his highness.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How may I entertain his majesty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To show my duty and his dignity? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit, from above.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b>, with others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, are the stealing foxes fled and gone</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before we could uncouple at their heels?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They are, my liege; but, with a cheerful cry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hot hounds and hardy chase them at the heels.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>This is the countess, Warwick, is it not?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Even she, my liege; whose beauty tyrant’s fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As a May blossom with pernicious winds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath sullied, wither’d, overcast, and done.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Hath she been fairer, Warwick, than she is?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious king, fair is she not at all,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If that herself were by to stain herself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I have seen her when she was herself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What strange enchantment lurk’d in those her eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When they excell’d this excellence they have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That now their dim decline hath power to draw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My subject eyes from persing majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To gaze on her with doting admiration?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>In duty lower than the ground I kneel</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And for my dull knees bow my feeling heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To witness my obedience to your highness;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With many millions of a subject’s thanks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For this your royal presence, whose approach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath driven war and danger from my gate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lady, stand up: I come to bring thee peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>However thereby I have purchas’d war.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No war to you, my liege; the Scots are gone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And gallop home toward Scotland with their hate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lest yielding here I pine in shameful love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, we’ll pursue the Scots;⁠—Artois, away!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A little while, my gracious sovereign, stay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let the power of a mighty king</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Honour our roof; my husband in the wars,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he shall hear it, will triumph for joy:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, dear my liege, now niggard not thy state;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being at the wall, enter our homely gate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pardon me, countess, I will come no near;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I dream’d to-night of treason, and I fear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td>Far from this place let ugly treason lie!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No farther off than her conspiring eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which shoots infected poison in my heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beyond repulse of wit or cure of art.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now in the sun alone it doth not lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With light to take light from a mortal eye;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For here two day-stars, that mine eyes would see,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More than the sun, steals mine own light from me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Contemplative desire! desire to be</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In contemplation, that may master thee!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Warwick, Artois, to horse, and let’s away!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td>What might I speak, to make my sovereign stay?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What needs a tongue to such a speaking eye</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That more persuades than winning oratory?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Let not thy presence, like the April sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Flatter our earth and suddenly be done.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More happy do not make our outward wall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than thou wilt grace our inner house withal.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our house, my liege, is like a country swain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose habit rude and manners blunt and plain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presageth nought, yet inly beautified</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With bounty’s riches and faire hidden pride:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, where the golden ore doth buried lie,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The ground, undeck’d with nature’s tapestry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seems barren, sere, unfertile, fructless, dry;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And where the upper turf of earth doth boast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His pride, perfumes and parti-colour’d cost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Delve there, and find this issue and their pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To spring from ordure and corruption’s side.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, to make up my all too long compare,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These ragged walls no testimony are,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is within; but, like a cloak, doth hide,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From weather’s waste, the under-garnish’d pride.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More gracious then my terms can let thee be,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Intreat thyself to stay a while with me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As wise as fair; what fond fit can be heard</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When wisdom keeps the gate as beauty’s guard?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Countess, albeit my business urgeth me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It shall attend while I attend on thee.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come on, my lords, here will I host to-night. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
