<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-3-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Flanders. The French Camp.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John of France</b>; his two Sons, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles Duke of Normandy</b>, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</b>; the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Duke of Lorraine</b>, and others.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here, till our navy of a thousand sail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have made a breakfast to our foe by sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us encamp to wait their happy speed.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lorraine, what readiness is Edward in?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How hast thou heard that he provided is</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of martial furniture for this exploit?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To lay aside unnecessary soothing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not to spend the time in circumstance,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis bruited for a certainty, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That he’s exceeding strongly fortified;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His subjects flock as willingly to war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if unto a triumph they were led.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>England was wont to harbour malcontents,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bloodthirsty and seditious Catilines,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spendthrifts, and such as gape for nothing else</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But changing and alteration of the state;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And is it possible,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they are now so loyal in themselves?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All but the Scot; who solemnly protests,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As heretofore I have inform’d his grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Never to sheathe his sword, or take a truce.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, that’s the anch’rage of some better hope!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, on the other side, to think what friends</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King Edward hath retain’d in Netherland,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Among those ever-bibbing Epicures,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those frothy Dutchmen, puff’d with double beer,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That drink and swill in every place they come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth not a little aggravate mine ire:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides, we hear, the Emperor conjoins,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And stalls him in his own authority:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, all the mightier that their number is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The greater glory reaps the victory.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some friends have we beside domestic power;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The stern Polonian, and the warlike Dane,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king of Bohemia and of Sicily,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are all become confederates with us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as I think, are marching hither apace. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drum within.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, soft, I hear the music of their drums,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By which I guess that their approach is near.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of Bohemia</b>, and Forces; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Aid</b> of Danes, Poles, and Muscovites.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King of Bohemia</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>King John of France, as league and neighbourhood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Requires when friends are anyway distress’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I come to aide thee with my country’s force.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Pole</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And from great Moscow, fearful to the Turk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lofty Poland, nurse of hardy men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I bring these servitors to fight for thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who willingly will venture in thy cause.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome, Bohemian king; and welcome, all:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This your great kindness I will not forget.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides your plentiful rewards in crowns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That from our treasury ye shall receive,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There comes a hare-brain’d nation, deck’d in pride,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The spoil of whom will be a treble game.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now my hope is full, my joy complete:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At sea, we are as puissant as the force</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of Agamemnon in the haven of Troy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By land, with Xerxes we compare of strength</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose soldiers drank up rivers in their thirst:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, Bayard-like, blind over-weening Ned,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To reach at our imperial diadem</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is either to be swallow’d of the waves</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or hack’d a-pieces when thou com’st ashore.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Near to the coast I have descried, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As I was busy in my watchful charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The proud Armado of King Edward’s ships:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which at the first, far off when I did ken,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seem’d as it were a grove of wither’d pines;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, drawing near, their glorious bright aspect,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Their streaming ensigns wrought of colour’d silk,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to a meadow full of sundry flowers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Adorns the naked bosom of the earth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Majestical the order of their course,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Figuring the horned circle of the moon:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And on the top-gallant of the admiral,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And likewise all the handmaids of his train,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The arms of England and of France unite</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are quarter’d equally by herald’s art.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus, tightly carried with a merry gale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>They plough the ocean hitherward amain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Dare he already crop the flower-de-luce?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hope, the honey being gather’d thence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He, with the spider, afterward approach’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall suck forth deadly venom from the leaves.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But where’s our navy? how are they prepar’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To wing themselves against this flight of ravens?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>They, having knowledge brought them by the scouts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did break from anchor straight; and, puff’d with rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No otherwise then were their sails with wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made forth, as when the empty eagle flies</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To satisfy his hungry griping maw.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>There’s for thy news. Return unto thy bark;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if thou scape the bloody stroke of war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do survive the conflict, come again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let us hear the manner of the fight.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mean space, my lords, ’tis best we be dispers’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To several places, lest they chance to land:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, you, my lord, with your Bohemian troops,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall pitch your battles on the lower hand;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My eldest son, the Duke of Normandy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Together with the aid of Muscovites,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall climb the higher ground another way;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here in the middle coast, betwixt you both,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Philip, my youngest boy, and I will lodge.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So, lords, be gone, and look unto your charge;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You stand for France, an empire fair and large.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of Bohemia</b>, and Forces.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now tell me, Philip, what is thy conceit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Touching the challenge that the English make?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I say, my lord, claim Edward what he can,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bring he ne’er so plain a pedigree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Tis you are in possession of the crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that’s the surest point of all the law:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, were it not, yet, ere he should prevail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll make a conduit of my dearest blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or chase those straggling upstarts home again.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well said, young Philip! Call for bread and wine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we may cheer our stomachs with repast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To look our foes more sternly in the face. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A table and provisions brought in; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King</b> and his <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Son</b> set down to it. Ordnance afar off.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now is begun the heavy day at sea.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fight, Frenchmen, fight; be like the field of bears,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When they defend their younglings in the caves!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Steer, angry Nemesis, the happy helm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That with the sulphur battles of your rage</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The English fleet may be dispers’d and sunk! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Ordnance again.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O father, how this echoing cannon-shot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like sweetest harmony, digests my eats!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, boy, thou hear’st what thund’ring terror ’tis,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To buckle for a kingdom’s sovereignty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The earth, with giddy trembling when it shakes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or when the exhalations of the air</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Breaks in extremity of lightning flash,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Affrights not more than kings when they dispose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To shew the rancour of their high-swoln hearts. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Retreat heard.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Retreat is sounded; one side hath the worse:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, if it be the French!⁠—Sweet Fortune, turn;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in thy turning, change the forward winds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, with advantage of a favouring sky,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our men may vanquish and the other fly!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My heart misgives:⁠—say, mirror of pale death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whom belongs the honour of this day?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Relate, I pray thee, if thy breath will serve,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sad discourse of this discomfiture.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Mariner</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I will, my lord.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gracious sovereign, France hath ta’en the foil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And boasting Edward triumphs with success.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These iron-hearted navies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When last I was reporter to your grace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Both full of angry spleen, of hope and fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hasting to meet each other in the face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>At last conjoin’d, and by their admiral</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our admiral encounter’d many shot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By this, the other, that beheld these twain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give earnest-penny of a further wrack,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like fiery dragons took their haughty flight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, likewise meeting, from their smoky wombs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sent many grim ambassadors of death.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then gan the day to turn to gloomy night;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And darkness did as well enclose the quick</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As those that were but newly reft of life.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No leisure serv’d for friends to bid farewell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if it had, the hideous noise was such,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As each to other seemed deaf and dumb.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Purple the sea; whose channel fill’d as fast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With streaming gore that from the maimed fell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As did her gushing moisture break into</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The crannied cleftures of the through-shot planks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here flew a head, dissever’d from the trunk;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There mangled arms and legs were toss’d aloft,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As when a whirlwind takes the summer dust</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And scatters it in middle of the air.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then might ye see the reeling vessels split</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tottering sink into the ruthless flood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until their lofty tops were seen no more.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All shifts were tried both for defence and hurt.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now the effect of valour and of fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of resolution and of cowardice,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We lively pictur’d; how the one for fame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The other by compulsion laid about.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Much did the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nonpareille</i>, that brave ship;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So did the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Black-snake of Bullen</i>, than which</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A bonnier vessel never yet spread sail:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all in vain; both sun, the wind and tide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Revolted all unto our foemen’s side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we perforce were fain to give them way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they are landed: thus my tale is done;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We have untimely lost, and they have won.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then rests there nothing, but with present speed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To join our several forces all in one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And bid them battle ere they range too far.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, gentle Philip, let us hence depart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This soldier’s words have pierc’d thy father’s heart. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Picardy. Fields near Cressy.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Frenchman</b>, meeting certain others, a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</b> and two Children, laden with household-stuff, as removing.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Well met, my masters: how now? what’s the news?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wherefore are ye laden thus with stuff?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, is it quarter-day, that you remove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And carry bag and baggage too?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Quarter-day? aye, and quartering day, I fear:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Have ye not heard the news that flies abroad?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Frenchman</td>
							<td>What news?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How the French navy is destroy’d at sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that the English army is arriv’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Frenchman</td>
							<td>What then?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What then, quoth you? why, is’t not time to fly,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When envy and destruction is so nigh?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Content thee, man; they are far enough from hence;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And will be met, I warrant ye, to their cost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before they break so far into the realm.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, so the grasshopper doth spend the time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In mirthful jollity, till winter come;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then too late he would redeem his time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When frozen cold hath nipp’d his careless head.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He, that no sooner will provide a cloak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than when he sees it doth begin to rain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May, peradventure, for his negligence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be throughly wash’d when he suspects it not.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We that have charge and such a train as this</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Must look in time to look for them and us,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest, when we would, we cannot be reliev’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Belike, you then despair of all success</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And think your country will be subjugate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Frenchman</td>
							<td>We cannot tell; ’tis good to fear the worst.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet rather fight, than like unnatural sons</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forsake your loving parents in distress.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tush, they that have already taken arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Are many fearful millions in respect</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that small handful of our enemies.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But ’tis a rightful quarrel must prevail;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Edward is son unto our late king’s sister,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When John Valois is three degrees remov’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Woman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Besides, there goes a prophecy abroad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Publish’d by one that was a friar once</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose oracles have many times prov’d true;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now he says, “The time will shortly come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When as a lion, roused in the west,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall carry hence the flower-de-luce of France”:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These, I can tell ye, and such-like surmises</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Strike many Frenchmen cold unto the heart.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter another <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Frenchman</b>, hastily.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Fourth Frenchman</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Fly, countrymen and citizens of France!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet-flow’ring peace, the root of happy life,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is quite abandon’d and expuls’d the land:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Instead of whom, ransack-constraining war</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sits like to ravens upon your houses’ tops;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Slaughter and mischief walk within your streets,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, unrestrain’d, make havoc as they pass:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The form whereof even now myself beheld,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon this fair mountain, whence I came.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For so far off as I directed mine eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I might perceive five cities all on fire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Corn-fields and vineyards, burning like an oven;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, as the reaking vapour in the wind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Turn’d but aside, I likewise might discern</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The poor inhabitants, escap’d the flame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fall numberless upon the soldiers’ pikes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Three ways these dreadful ministers of wrath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do tread the measures of their tragic march.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the right hand comes the conquering king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the left his hot unbridled son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the midst our nation’s glittering host;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All which, though distant, yet conspire in one</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To leave a desolation where they come.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fly, therefore, citizens, if you be wise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Seek out some habitation further off.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here is you stay, your wives will be abus’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your treasure shar’d before your weeping eyes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shelter yourselves, for now the storm doth rise.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away, away! methinks, I hear their drums.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, wretched France, I greatly fear thy fall;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy glory shaketh like a tottering wall. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drums. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, marching; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and Forces, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Gobin de Grey</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Where is the Frenchman, by whose cunning guide</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We found the shallow of this river Somme,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And had direction how to pass the sea?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gobin</td>
							<td>Here, my good lord.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>How art thou called? tell me thy name.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Gobin</td>
							<td>Gobin de Grey, if please your excellence.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then, Gobin, for the service thou hast done,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We here enlarge and give thee liberty;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for a<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> recompense, beside this good,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shalt receive five hundred marks in gold.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know not how, we should have met our son;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom now in heart I wish I might behold.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Good news, my lord; the prince is hard at hand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with him comes Lord Audley and the rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom since our landing we could never meet.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, and Forces.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Welcome, fair prince! How hast thou sped, my son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since thy arrival on the coast of France?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Successfully, I thank the gracious heavens:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some of their strongest cities we have won,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As Harflew, Lo, Crotaye, and Carentine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And others wasted; leaving at our heels</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A wide apparent field and beaten path</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For solitariness to progress in:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, those that would submit, we kindly pardon’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But who in scorn refus’d our proffer’d peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Endured the penalty of sharp revenge.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, France, why shouldst thou be thus obstinate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the kind embracement of thy friends?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How gently had we thought to touch thy breast</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And set our foot upon thy tender mould,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But that in froward and disdainful pride</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou, like a skittish and untamed colt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dost start aside and strike us with thy heels?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But tell me, Ned, in all thy warlike course</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hast thou not seen the usurping King of France?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yes, my good lord, and not two hours ago,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With full a hundred thousand fighting men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon the one side of the river’s bank,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I on the other; with his multitudes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I fear’d he would have cropp’d our smaller power:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, happily, perceiving your approach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He hath withdrawn himself to Cressy plains;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where, as it seemeth by his good array,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He means to bid us battle presently.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>He shall be welcome, that’s the thing we crave.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</b>, his Sons; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bohemia</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</b>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and Forces.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Edward, know, that John, the true King of France⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Musing thou shouldst encroach upon his land,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in thy tyrannous proceeding, slay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His faithful subjects and subvert his towns⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Spits in thy face; and in this manner following</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upbraids thee with thine arrogant intrusion.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>First, I condemn thee for a fugitive,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A thievish pirate, and a needy mate;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>One, that hath either no abiding place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else, inhabiting some barren soil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where neither herb nor fruitful grain is had,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dost altogether live by pilfering:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Next⁠—insomuch thou hast infring’d thy faith,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Broke league and solemn covenant made with me⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I hold thee for a false pernicious wretch:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, last of all⁠—although I scorn to cope</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With one so much inferior to myself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, in respect thy thirst is all for gold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy labour rather to be fear’d than lov’d⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To satisfy thy lust in either part,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here am I come, and with me have I brought</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Exceeding store of treasure, pearl and coin.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Leave therefore now to persecute the weak;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And armed ent’ring conflict with the arm’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let it be seen, ’mongst other petty thefts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How thou canst win this pillage manfully.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If gall or wormwood have a pleasant taste,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then is thy salutation honey-sweet:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But as the one hath no such property,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So is the other most satirical.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet wot how I regard thy worthless taunts;⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If thou have utter’d them to foil my fame</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or dim the reputation of my birth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Know that thy wolvish barking cannot hurt:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If slily to insinuate with the world,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with a strumpet’s artificial line</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To paint thy vicious and deformed cause,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be well assur’d the counterfeit will fade</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the end thy foul defects be seen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if thou didst it to provoke me on⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As who should say, I were but timorous,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or coldly negligent did need a spur⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bethink thyself how slack I was at sea;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How, since my landing, I have won no towns,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Enter’d no further but upon the coast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there have ever since securely slept.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if I have been otherwise employ’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Imagine, Valois, whether I intend</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To skirmish, not for pillage, but for the crown</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which thou dost wear; and that I vow to have,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or one of us shall fall into his grave.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Look not for cross invectives at our hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or railing execrations of despite:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let creeping serpents hid in hollow banks</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sting with their tongues; we have remorseless swords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And they shall plead for us and our affairs.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet thus much, briefly, by my father’s leave:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As all the immodest poison of thy throat</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is scandalous and most notorious lies,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And our pretended quarrel is truly just,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So end the battle when we meet to day:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May either of us prosper and prevail</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or, luckless curst, receive eternal shame!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That needs no further question, and, I know,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His conscience witnesseth, it is my right.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, Valois, say, wilt thou yet resign,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before the sickle’s thrust into the corn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or that inkindled fury turn to flame?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Edward, I know what right thou hast in France;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ere I basely will resign my crown,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This champion field shall be a pool of blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And all our prospect as a slaughter-house.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, that approves thee, tyrant, what thou art:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No father, king or shepherd of thy realm;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But one that tears her entrails with thy hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, like a thirsty tyger, suck’st her blood.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>You peers of France, why do you follow him</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is so prodigal to spend your lives?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whom should they follow, aged impotent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But he that is their true-born sovereign?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Upbraid’st thou him, because within his face</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Time hath engrav’d deep characters of age?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Know, these grave scholars of experience,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like stiff-grown oaks, will stand immovable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When whirlwind quickly turns up younger trees.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Was ever any of thy father’s house</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King, but thyself, before this present time?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Edward’s great linage, by the mother’s side,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Five hundred years hath held the sceptre up:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Judge then, conspirators, by this descent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which is the true-born sovereign, this, or that.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Father, range your battles, prate no more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These English fain would spend the time in words,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, night approaching, they escape unfought.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lords and my loving subjects, now’s the time</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That your intended force must bide the touch:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Therefore, my friends, consider this in brief⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that you fight for is your natural king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He against whom you fight, a foreigner:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that you fight for, rules in clemency</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And reins you with a mild and gentle bit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He against whom you fight, if he prevail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will straight enthrone himself in tyranny,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make slaves of you, and with a heavy hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Curtail and curb your sweetest liberty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, to protect your country and your king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let but the haughty courage of your hearts</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Answer the number of your able hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we shall quickly chase these fugitives.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what’s this Edward but a belly-god,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A tender and lascivious wantonness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That th’ other day was almost dead for love?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what, I pray you, is his goodly guard?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Such as, but scant them of their chines of beef</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And take away their downy feather-beds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, presently, they are as resty-stiff</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ’twere a many over-ridden jades.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, Frenchmen, scorn that such should be your lords,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rather bind ye them in captive bands.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Frenchmen</td>
							<td>Vive le Roy! God save King John of France!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now on this plain of Cressy spread yourselves⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Edward, when thou dar’st, begin the fight. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Charles</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Bohemia</b>, and Forces.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We presently will meet thee, John of France:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, English lords, let us resolve to-day</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either to clear us of that scandalous crime</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or be entombed in our innocence.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Ned, because this battle is the first</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That ever yet thou fought’st in pitched field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ancient custom is of Martialists,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dub thee with the type of chivalry,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In solemn manner we will give thee arms:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, therefore, heralds, orderly bring forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A strong attirement for the prince my son.⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Enter four Heralds, bringing a coat-armour, a helmet, a lance, and a shield: first Herald delivers the armour to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, who puts it on his <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Son</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Edward Plantagenet, in the name of God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As with this armour I impale thy breast,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So be thy noble unrelenting heart</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wall’d in with flint of matchless fortitude</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never base affections enter there;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou com’st!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now follow, lords, and do him honour too.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Receiving the helmet from the second Herald.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>As I do set this helmet on thy head,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Wherewith the chamber of thy brain is fenc’d,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>So may thy temples, with Bellona’s hand,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Be still adorn’d with laurel victory;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou com’st!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Receiving the lance from the third Herald.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Receive this lance into thy manly hand;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Use it in fashion of a brazen pen</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To draw forth bloody stratagems in France</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And print thy valiant deeds in honour’s book;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou com’st!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td>
							<td>
								<p>
									<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Receiving the shield from the fourth Herald.</i>
								</p>
								<div epub:type="z3998:verse">
									<p>
										<span>Edward Plantagenet, Prince of Wales,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Hold, take this target, wear it on thy arm;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>And may the view thereof, like Perseus’ shield,</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Astonish and transform thy gazing foes</span>
										<br/>
										<span>To senseless images of meagre death;</span>
										<br/>
										<span>Fight and be valiant, conquer where thou com’st!</span>
									</p>
								</div>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now wants there nought but knighthood; which deferr’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We leave till thou hast won it in the field.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious father, and ye forward peers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This honour, you have done me, animates</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cheers my green yet-scarce-appearing strength</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With comfortable good-presaging signs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No otherwise than did old Jacob’s words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When as he breath’d his blessings on his sons.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These hallow’d gifts of yours when I profane,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or use them not to glory of my God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To patronage the fatherless and poor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or for the benefit of England’s peace,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be numb my joints! wax feeble both mine arms!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wither my heart! that, like a sapless tree,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I may remain the map of infamy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then thus our steeled battles shall be rang’d;⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The leading of the vaward, Ned, is thine;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dignify whose lusty spirit the more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We temper it with Audley’s gravity;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, courage and experience join’d in one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your manage may be second unto none:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For the main battles, I will guide myself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, Derby, in the rearward march behind.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That orderly dispos’d and set in ’ray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let us to horse; and God grant us the day! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarums, as of a battle joined. Enter a many Frenchmen flying; <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince</b>, and English, pursuing; and exeunt: then enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O Lorraine, say, what mean our men to fly?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our number is far greater than our foes.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lorraine</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The garrison of Genoa’s, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That came from Paris, weary with their march,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Grudging to be so<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a> suddenly employ’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No sooner in the fore-front took their place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, straight retiring, so dismay’d the rest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As likewise they betook themselves to flight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In which, for haste to make a safe escape,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More in the clust’ring throng are press’d to death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than by the enemy, a thousand-fold.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O hapless fortune! Let us yet assay</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If we can counsel some of them to stay. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-3-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a></span>
				</h3>
				<p>The Same.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Lord Audley, whiles our son is in the chase,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Withdraw your powers unto this little hill,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here a season let us breathe ourselves.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>I will, my lord. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit. Retreat.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Just-dooming Heaven, whose secret providence</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To our gross judgement is inscrutable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How are we bound to praise thy wondrous works,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That hast this day giv’n way unto the right</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And made the wicked stumble at themselves!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b>, hastily.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td>
							<td>Rescue, King Edward! rescue for thy son!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rescue, Artois? what, is he prisoner?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or by violence fell beside his horse?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Neither, my lord; but narrowly beset</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With turning Frenchmen whom he did pursue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ’tis impossible that he should scape</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Except your highness presently descend.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Tut, let him fight; we gave him arms to-day,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And he is labouring for a knighthood, man.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b>, hastily.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The prince, my lord, the prince! O, succour him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He’s close encompass’d with a world of odds!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then will he win a world of honour too</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he by valour can redeem him thence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not, what remedy? we have more sons</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than one, to comfort our declining age.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, hastily.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Renowned Edward, give me leave, I pray,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To lead my soldiers where I may relieve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your grace’s son, in danger to be slain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The snares of French, like emmets on a bank,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Muster about him; whilest he, lion-like,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Entangled in the net of their assaults,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Franticly rends and bites the woven toil:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But all in vain, he cannot free himself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Audley, content; I will not have a man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>On pain of death, sent forth to succour him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is the day ordain’d by destiny</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To season his courage with those grievous thoughts,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, if he breathe out Nestor’s years on earth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will make him savour still of this exploit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>Ah, but he shall not live to see those days.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Why, then his epitaph is lasting praise.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Yet, good my lord, ’tis too much wilfulness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To let his blood be spilt that may be sav’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Exclaim no more; for none of you can tell</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether a borrow’d aid will serve or no.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Perhaps, he is already slain or ta’en:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dare a falcon when she’s in her flight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ever after she’ll be haggard-like:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let Edward be deliver’d by our hands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And still in danger he’ll expect the like;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But if himself himself redeem from thence,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He will have vanquish’d, cheerful, death and fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And ever after dread their force no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than if they were but babes or captive slaves.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>O cruel Father!⁠—Farewell, Edward, then!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>Farewell, sweet prince, the hope of chivalry!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</td>
							<td>O, would my life might ransom him from death!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, soft; me thinks I hear <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Retreat sounded.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dismal charge of trumpets’ loud retreat:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All are not slain, I hope, that went with him;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Some will return with tidings, good or bad.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b> in triumph, bearing in his hands his shivered lance; his sword, and battered armour, borne before him, and the body of the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King of Bohemia</b>, wrapped in the colours. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lords</b> run and embrace him.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>O joyful sight! victorious Edward lives!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>Welcome, brave prince!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Welcome, Plantagenet! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Embracing him.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>First having done my duty, as beseem’d, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kneels, and kisses his father’s hand.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lords, I regreet you all with hearty thanks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now, behold⁠—after my winter’s toil,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My painful voyage on the boist’rous sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of war’s devouring gulfs and steely rocks⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I bring my fraught unto the wished port,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My summer’s hope, my travel’s sweet reward:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And here with humble duty I present</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This sacrifice, this firstfruit of my sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Cropp’d and cut down even at the gate of death,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The King of Boheme, father, whom I slew;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose thousands had intrench’d me round about,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lay as thick upon my batter’d crest</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As on an anvil, with their pond’rous glaives:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet marble courage still did underprop;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And when my weary arms with often blows⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like the continual-lab’ring woodman’s axe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is enjoin’d to fell a load of oaks⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Began to falter, straight I would remember</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My gifts you gave me and my zealous vow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And then new courage made me fresh again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, in despite, I carv’d my passage forth</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And put the multitude to speedy flight.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, thus hath Edward’s hand fill’d your request,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And done, I hope, the duty of a knight.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ay, well thou hast deserv’d a knighthood, Ned!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, therefore, with thy sword, yet reeking warm <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Receiving it from the soldier who bore it and laying it on the kneeling <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>With blood of those that fought to be thy bane,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arise, Prince Edward, trusty knight at arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This day thou hast confounded me with joy</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And proved thyself fit heir unto a king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here is a note, my gracious lord, of those</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That in this conflict of our foes were slain:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Eleven princes of esteem; fourscore</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Barons; a hundred and twenty knights;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thirty thousand common soldiers;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, of our men, a thousand.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Our God be praised! Now, John of France, I hope,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou know’st King Edward for no wantonness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No love-sick cockney; nor his soldiers, jades.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But which way is the fearful king escap’d?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td>Towards Poitiers, noble father, and his sons.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ned, thou and Audley shall pursue them still;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself and Derby will to Calice straight,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And there be begirt that Haven town with siege.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now lies it on an upshot; therefore strike,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And wistly follow whiles the game’s on foot.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What picture’s this? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pointing to the colours.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A pelican, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wounding her bosom with her crooked beak</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That so her nest of young ones may be fed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With drops of blood that issue from her heart;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The motto, “<i xml:lang="la">Sic et vos</i>,” “and so should you.” <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt in triumph.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
