<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-5-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>Picardy. The English camp before Calais.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Philippa</b> his Queen, and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b>; Officers, Soldiers, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No more, Queen Philip, pacify yourself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Copland, except he can excuse his fault,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall find displeasure written in our looks.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And now unto this proud resisting town:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Soldiers, assault; I will no longer stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be deluded by their false delays;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Put all to sword, and make the spoil your own.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpets sound to arms. Enter, from the town, six <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</b>, in their shirts, and barefoot, with halters about their necks.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</td>
							<td>Mercy, King Edward! mercy, gracious lord!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Contemptuous villains! call ye now for truce?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Mine ears are stopp’d against your bootless cries:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sound, drums; <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">alarum</i> draw, threat’ning swords!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, noble prince, take pity on this town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hear us, mighty king!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We claim the promise that your highness made;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The two days’ respite is not yet expir’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And we are come with willingness to bear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What torturing death or punishment you please,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that the trembling multitude be sav’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My promise? Well, I do confess as much:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I do require the chiefest citizens</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And men of most account that should submit;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You, peradventure, are but servile grooms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or some felonious robbers on the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whom, apprehended, law would execute,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Albeit severity lay dead in us:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, no, ye cannot overreach us thus.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Citizen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>The sun, dread lord, that in the western fall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beholds us now low brought through misery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did in the orient purple of the morn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Salute our coming forth, when we were known;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or may our portion be with damned fiends.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If it be so, then let our covenant stand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We take possession of the town in peace:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, for yourselves, look you for no remorse;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, as imperial justice hath decreed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your bodies shall be dragg’d about these walls</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And after feel the stroke of quartering steel:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This is your doom;⁠—go, soldiers, see it done.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, be more mild unto these yielding men!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is a glorious thing, to stablish peace;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And kings approach the nearest unto God,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By giving life and safety unto men.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As thou intendest to be King of France,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So let her people live to call thee king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what the sword cuts down or fire hath spoil’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is held in reputation none of ours.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Although experience teach us this is true,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That peaceful quietness brings most delight</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When most of all abuses are controll’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet, insomuch it shall be known that we</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As well can master our affections</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As conquer other by the dint of sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Philip, prevail; we yield to thy request;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These men shall live to boast of clemency⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, tyranny, strike terror to thyself.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</td>
							<td>Long live your highness! happy be your reign!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, get you hence, return unto the town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And if this kindness hath deserved your love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Learn then to reverence Edward as your king.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, might we hear of our affairs abroad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We would, till gloomy winter were o’er-spent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dispose our men in garrison a while.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But who comes here?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Copland</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King David</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>Copland, my lord, and David King of Scots.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Is this the proud presumptuous squire o’ the north</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That would not yield his prisoner to my queen?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Copland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I am, my liege, a northern squire, indeed,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But neither proud nor insolent, I trust.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What moved thee then to be so obstinate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To contradict our royal queen’s desire?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Copland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No wilful disobedience, mighty lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But my desert and public law of arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I took the king myself in single fight;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, like a soldier, would be loath to lose</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The least pre-eminence that I had won:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Copland straight upon your highness’ charge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is come to France, and with a lowly mind</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth vail the bonnet of his victory.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Receive, dread lord, the custom of my fraught,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The wealthy tribute of my labouring hands;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which should long since have been surrender’d up,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had but your gracious self been there in place.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But, Copland, thou didst scorn the king’s command,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Neglecting our commission in his name.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Copland</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>His name I reverence, but his person more;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His name shall keep me in allegiance still,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to his person I will bend my knee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I pray thee, Philip, let displeasure pass;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This man doth please me and I like his words:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what is he that will attempt great deeds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And lose the glory that ensues the same?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>All rivers have recourse unto the sea;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And Copland’s faith, relation to his king.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Kneel therefore down; now rise, king Edward’s knight:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, to maintain thy state, I freely give</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Five hundred marks a year to thee and thine.⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>Welcome, Lord Salisbury: what news from Britain?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This, mighty king: the country we have won;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And John de Mountford, regent of that place,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presents your highness with this coronet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Protesting true allegiance to your grace.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>We thank thee for thy service, valiant earl;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Challenge our favour, for we owe it thee.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But now, my lord, as this is joyful news,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So must my voice be tragical again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I must sing of doleful accidents.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What, have our men the overthrow at Poitiers?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or is our son beset with too much odds?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Salisbury</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>He was, my lord: and as my worthless self,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With forty other serviceable knights,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Under safe-conduct of the Dauphin’s seal</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did travel that way, finding him distress’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A troop of lances met us on the way,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Surpris’d, and brought us prisoners to the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, proud of this and eager of revenge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commanded straight to cut off all our heads:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And surely we had died, but that the duke,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More full of honour than his angry sire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Procur’d our quick deliverance from thence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, ere we went, “Salute your king,” quoth he,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Bid him provide a funeral for his son,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To-day our sword shall cut his thread of life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, sooner than he thinks, we’ll be with him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To quittance those displeasures he hath done”:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This said, we passed, not daring to reply;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Our hearts were dead, our looks diffus’d and wan.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wand’ring, at last we climb’d unto a hill;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From whence, although our grief were much before,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet now to see the occasion with our eyes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did thrice so much increase our heaviness:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For there, my lord, O, there we did descry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Down in a valley how both armies lay.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The French had cast their trenches like a ring;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And every barricado’s open front</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Was thick emboss’d with brazen ordinance.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here stood a battaile of ten thousand horse;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There twice as many pikes, in quadrant-wise:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here cross-bows and deadly-wounding darts:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And in the midst, like to a slender point</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Within the compass of the horizon⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ’twere a rising bubble in the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A hazel-wand amidst a wood of pines,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or as a bear fast chain’d unto a stake⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stood famous Edward, still expecting when</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Those dogs of France would fasten on his flesh.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Anon, the death-procuring knell begins:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Off go the cannons, that, with trembling noise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did shake the very mountain where they stood;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then sound the trumpets’ clangour in the air,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The battles join: and, when we could no more</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Discern the difference ’twixt the friend and foe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>(So intricate the dark confusion was)</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away we turn’d our wat’ry eyes, with sighs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As black as powder fuming into smoke.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thus, I fear, unhappy have I told</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The most untimely tale of Edward’s fall.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah me! is this my welcome into France?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is this the comfort that I look’d to have</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When I should meet with my beloved son?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sweet Ned, I would thy mother in the sea</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Had been prevented of this mortal grief!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Content thee, Philip; ’tis not tears will serve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To call him back if he be taken hence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comfort thyself, as I do, gentle queen,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With hope of sharp, unheard-of, dire revenge.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He bids me to provide his funeral;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so I will: but all the peers in France</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall mourners be and weep out bloody tears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Until their empty veins be dry and sere:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pillars of his hearse shall be his bones;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mould that covers him, their cities’ ashes;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His knell, the groaning cries of dying men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in the stead of tapers on his tomb,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An hundred fifty towers shall burning blaze,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>While we bewail our valiant son’s decease.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish of Trumpets within. Enter a <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Herald</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Rejoice, my lord; ascend the imperial throne!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mighty and redoubted Prince of Wales,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Great servitor to bloody Mars in arms,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Frenchman’s terror and his country’s fame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Triumphant rideth like a Roman peer:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, lowly at his stirrup, comes afoot</span>
									<br/>
									<span>King John of France together with his son</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In captive bonds; whose diadem he brings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To crown thee with and to proclaim thee king.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Away with mourning, Philip, wipe thine eyes;⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sound, trumpets, welcome in Plantagenet!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A loud flourish. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Artois</b>, with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Philip</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As things long lost, when they are found again,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So doth my son rejoice his father’s heart,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For whom, even now, my soul was much perplex’d! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Embracing the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince</b>.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Queen</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Be this a token to express my joy, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses him.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>For inward passion will not let me speak.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My gracious father, here receive the gift, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Presenting him with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King John’s</b> crown.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>This wreath of conquest and reward of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Got with as mickle peril of our lives</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As e’er was thing of price before this day;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Install your highness in your proper right:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, herewithal, I render to your hands</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These prisoners, chief occasion of our strife.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So, John of France, I see you keep your word.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You promis’d to be sooner with ourself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than we did think for, and ’tis so indeed:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, had you done at first as now you do,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many civil towns had stood untouch’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That now are turn’d to ragged heaps of stones?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How many people’s lives might’st thou have sav’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That are untimely sunk into their graves?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Edward, recount not things irrevocable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Tell me what ransom thou requir’st to have.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thy ransom, John, hereafter shall be known.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But first to England thou must cross the seas</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To see what entertainment it affords;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Howe’er it falls, it cannot be so bad</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As ours hath been since we arriv’d in France.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King John</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Accursed man! of this I was foretold,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But did misconster what the prophet told.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, father, this petition Edward makes⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To thee, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">kneels</i> whose grace hath been his strongest shield,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That, as thy pleasure chose me for the man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be the instrument to show thy power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So thou wilt grant, that many princes more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bred and brought up within that little isle,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May still be famous for like victories!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, for my part, the bloody scars I bear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And weary nights that I have watch’d in field,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The dangerous conflicts I have often had,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The fearful menaces were proffer’d me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The heat and cold and what else might displease,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I wish were now redoubled twenty-fold;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So that hereafter ages, when they read</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The painful traffic of my tender youth,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might thereby be inflamed with such resolve</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As not the territories of France alone,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But likewise Spain, Turkey, and what countries else</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That justly would provoke fair England’s ire,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Might, at their presence, tremble and retire!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here, English lords, we do proclaim a rest,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An interceasing of our painful arms:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sheath up your swords, refresh your weary limbs,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Peruse your spoils; and, after we have breath’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A day or two within this haven-town,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>God willing, then for England we’ll be shipp’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where, in a happy hour, I trust, we shall</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arrive, three kings, two princes, and a queen. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Flourish. Exeunt omnes.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
