<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="scene-2-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same. Gardens of the castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I might perceive his eye in her eye lost,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His ear to drink her sweet tongue’s utterance;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And changing passion, like inconstant clouds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That rack upon the carriage of the winds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Increase and die in his disturbed cheeks.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lo, when she blush’d, even then did he look pale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As if her cheeks, by some enchanted power,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Attracted had the cherry blood from his:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Anon, with reverent fear when she grew pale,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His cheeks put on their scarlet ornaments,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But no more like her oriental red,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than brick to coral or live things to dead.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why did he then thus counterfeit her looks?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If she did blush, ’twas tender modest shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Being in the sacred presence of a king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he did blush, ’twas red immodest shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To vail his eyes amiss, being a king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If she look’d pale, ’twas silly woman’s fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bear herself in presence of a king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If he look’d pale, it was with guilty fear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To dote amiss, being a mighty king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, Scottish wars, farewell! I fear, ’twill prove</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A ling’ring English siege of peevish love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here comes his highness, walking all alone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>She is grown more fairer far since I came hither;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her voice more silver every word than other,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her wit more fluent: what a strange discourse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unfolded she of David and his Scots!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“Even thus,” quoth she, “he spake,”⁠—and then spoke broad,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With epithites and accents of the Scot;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But somewhat better than the Scot could speak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>“And thus,” quoth she⁠—and answer’d then herself;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For who could speak like her? but she herself</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Breathes from the wall an angel’s note from heaven</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of sweet defiance to her barbarous foes.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When she would talk of peace, methinks, her tongue</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commanded war to prison; when of war,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It waken’d Caesar from his Roman grave,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To hear war beautified by her discourse.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Wisdom is foolishness, but in her tongue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beauty a slander, but in her fair face:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>There is no summer, but in her cheerful looks,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor frosty winter, but in her disdain.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot blame the Scots that did besiege her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For she is all the treasure of our land;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But call them cowards, that they ran away,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Having so rich and fair a cause to stay.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Art thou there, Lodwick? give me ink and paper.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>I will, my sovereign.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And bid the lords hold on their play at chess,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For we will walk and meditate alone.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>I will, my liege. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>This fellow is well read in poetry</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hath a lusty and persuasive spirit:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will acquaint him with my passion;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which he shall shadow with a veil of lawn,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Through which the queen of beauty’s queens shall see</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Herself the ground of my infirmity.⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>hast thou pen, ink, and paper ready, Lodwick?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>Ready, my liege.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then in the summer arbour sit by me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Make it our council-house, or cabinet;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since green our thoughts, green be the conventicle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Where we will ease us by disburd’ning them.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, Lodwick, invocate some golden muse</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bring thee hither an enchanted pen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That may, for sighs, set down true sighs indeed;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Talking of grief, to make thee ready groan;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, when thou writ’st of tears, encouch the word,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Before and after, with such sweet laments,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That it may raise drops in a Tartar’s eye,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make a flint-heart Scythian pitiful:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For so much moving hath a poet’s pen;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, if thou be a poet, move thou so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And be enriched by thy sovereign’s love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, if the touch of sweet concordant strings</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could force attendance in the ears of hell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How much more shall the strains of poets’ wit</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beguile and ravish soft and human minds?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>To whom, my lord, shall I direct my style?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>To one that shames the fair and sots the wise;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose body is an abstract or a brief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Contains each general virtue in the world.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Better than beautiful, thou must begin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Devise for fair a fairer word than fair;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And every ornament, that thou wouldst praise,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fly it a pitch above the soar of praise:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For flattery fear thou not to be convicted;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, were thy admiration ten times more,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ten times ten thousand more the worth exceeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of that thou art to praise, thy praise’s worth.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Begin, I will to contemplate the while:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forget not to set down, how passionate,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How heart-sick, and how full of languishment,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her beauty makes me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>Write I to a woman?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What beauty else could triumph over me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or who but women, do our love-lays greet?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What, think’st thou I did bid thee praise a horse?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of what condition or estate she is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>’Twere requisite that I should know, my lord.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Of such estate, that hers is as a throne,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And my estate the footstool where she treads:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then may’st thou judge what her condition is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By the proportion of her mightiness.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Write on, while I peruse her in my thoughts.</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="elision">⋮</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her voice to music, or the nightingale:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To music every summer-leaping swain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Compares his sun-burnt lover when she speaks:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And why should I speak of the nightingale?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The nightingale sings of adulterate wrong;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that, compar’d, is too satyrical:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For sin, though sin, would not be so esteem’d;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, rather, virtue sin, sin virtue deem’d.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her hair, far softer than the silkworm’s twist,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like to a flattering glass, doth make more fair</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The yellow amber: “like a flattering glass”</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Comes in too soon; for, writing of her eyes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll say, that like a glass they catch the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thence the hot reflection doth rebound</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against the breast, and burns my heart within.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah, what a world of descant makes my soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon this voluntary ground of love!⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, Lodwick, hast thou turn’d thy ink to gold?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If not, write but in letters capital</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mistress’ name, and it will gild thy paper.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Read, Lodwick, read;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fill thou the empty hollows of mine ears</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With the sweet hearing of thy poetry.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>I have not to a period brought her praise.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Her praise is as my love, both infinite,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which apprehend such violent extremes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That they disdain an ending period.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Her beauty hath no match but my affection;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hers more than most, mine most, and more than more:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hers more to praise than tell the sea by drops;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nay, more, than drop the massy earth by sands,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, sand by sand, print them in memory:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then wherefore talk’st thou of a period,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To that which craves unended admiration?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Read, let us hear.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>“More fair and chaste than is the queen of shades,”⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That line hath two faults, gross and palpable:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Compar’st thou her to the pale queen of night,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who, being set in dark, seems therefore light?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What is she, when the sun lifts up his head,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But like a fading taper, dim and dead?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My love shall brave the eye of heaven at noon,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, being unmask’d, outshine the golden sun.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>What is the other fault, my sovereign lord?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Read o’er the line again.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>“More fair and chaste,”⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I did not bid thee talk of chastity,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To ransack so the treasure of her mind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I had rather have her chas’d, than chaste.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Out with the moon-line, I will none of it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let me have her liken’d to the sun:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say, she hath thrice more splendour than the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That her perfections emulate the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she breeds sweets as plenteous as the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she doth thaw cold winter like the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she doth cheer fresh summer like the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That she doth dazzle gazers like the sun:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, in this application to the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Bid her be free and general as the sun;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who smiles upon the basest weed that grows,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As lovingly as on the fragrant rose.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s see what follows that same moon-light line.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>“More fair and chaste than is the queen of shades;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>More bold in constancy”⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>In constancy! than who?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>—“Than Judith was.”</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O monstrous line! Put in the next a sword,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I shall woo her to cut of my head.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blot, blot, good Lodwick! Let us hear the next.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>There’s all that yet is done.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I thank thee then, thou hast done little ill;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But what is done, is passing, passing ill;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, let the captain talk of boist’rous war;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The prisoner, of immured dark constraint;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sick man best sets down the pangs of death;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The man that starves, the sweetness of a feast;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The frozen soul, the benefit of fire;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And every grief, his happy opposite:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Love cannot sound well, but in lovers’ tongues;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me the pen and paper, I will write.⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But soft, here comes the treasurer of my spirit.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lodwick, thou know’st not how to draw a battle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>These wings, these flankers, and these squadrons</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Argue in thee defective discipline:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou shouldest have plac’d this here, this other here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Pardon my boldness, my thrice-gracious lord;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let my intrusion here be call’d my duty,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That comes to see my sovereign how he fares.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Go, draw the same, I tell thee in what form.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td>I go. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Sorry I am, to see my liege so sad:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What may thy subject do, to drive from thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy gloomy consort, sullen melancholy?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Ah, lady, I am blunt, and cannot straw</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The flowers of solace in a ground of shame:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since I came hither, countess, I am wrong’d.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Now, God forbid, that any in my house</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Should think my sovereign wrong! Thrice-gentle king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Acquaint me with your cause of discontent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>How near then shall I be to remedy?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As near, my liege, as all my woman’s power</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can pawn itself to buy thy remedy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If thou speak’st true, then have I my redress:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Engage thy power to redeem my joys,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I am joyful, countess; else, I die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td>I will, my liege.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Swear, countess, that thou wilt.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td>By Heaven, I will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then take thyself a little way aside,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And tell thyself, a king doth dote on thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Say that within thy power it<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> doth lie</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To make him happy, and that thou hast sworn</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To give him all the joy within thy power:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Do this; and tell me, when I shall be happy.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>All this is done, my thrice-dread sovereign:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That power of love, that I have power to give,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou hast with all devout obedience;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Employ me how thou wilt in proof thereof.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Thou hear’st me say, that I do dote on thee.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If on my beauty, take it if thou canst;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though little, I do prize it ten times less:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If on my virtue, take it if thou canst;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For virtue’s store by giving doth augment:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it on what it will, that I can give</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And thou canst take away, inherit it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>It is thy beauty that I would enjoy.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O, were it painted, I would wipe it off</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dispossess myself, to give it thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, sovereign, it is solder’d to my life;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take one, and both; for, like an humble shadow,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It haunts the sunshine of my summer’s life.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>But thou may’st lend it me to sport withal.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As easy may my intellectual soul</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be lent away, and yet my body live,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>As lend my body, palace to my soul,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away from her, and yet retain my soul.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My body is her bower, her court, her abbey,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And she an angel, pure, divine, unspotted;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If I should leave her house, my lord, to thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I kill my poor soul, and my poor soul me.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Didst thou not swear, to give me what I would?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td>I did, my liege; so, what you would, I could.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I wish no more of thee than thou may’st give,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Nor beg I do not, but I rather buy;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is, thy love; and, for that love of thine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In rich exchange, I tender to thee mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>But that your lips were sacred, my lord,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You would profane the holy name of love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That love, you offer me, you cannot give,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Caesar owes that tribute to his queen:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That love, you beg of me, I cannot give,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For Sara owes that duty to her lord.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that doth clip or counterfeit your stamp</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall die, my lord: and will your sacred self</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Commit high treason against the King of Heaven,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To stamp his image in forbidden metal,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Forgetting your allegiance and your oath?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In violating marriage’ sacred law,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>You break a greater honour than yourself:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be a king, is of a younger house</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than to be married; your progenitor,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Sole-reigning Adam on the universe,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By God was honour’d for a married man,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not by him anointed for a king.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It is a penalty to break your statutes,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Though not enacted with your highness’ hand:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How much more, to infringe the holy act</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Made by the mouth of God, seal’d with his hand?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I know, my sovereign⁠—in my husband’s love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who now doth loyal service in his wars⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Doth but so try the wife of Salisbury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whether she will hear a wanton’s tale, or no;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lest being therein guilty by my stay,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>From that, not from my liege, I turn away. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Whether is her beauty by her words divine,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or are her words sweet chaplains to her beauty?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Like as the wind doth beautify a sail,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And as a sail becomes the unseen wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So do her words her beauty, beauty words.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, that I were a honey-gathering bee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bear the comb of virtue from this flower;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And not a poison-sucking envious spider,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To turn the juice I take to deadly venom!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Religion is austere, and beauty gentle;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Too strict a guardian for so fair a ward.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, that she were, as is the air, to me!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why, so she is; for, when I would embrace her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This do I, and catch nothing but myself.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must enjoy her; for I cannot beat,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With reason and reproof, fond love away.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Here comes her father: I will work with him,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To bear my colours in this field of love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How is it, that my sovereign is so sad?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May I with pardon know your highness’ grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that my old endeavour will remove it,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It shall not cumber long your majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>A kind and voluntary gift thou proffer’st,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I was forward to have begg’d of thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, O thou world, great nurse of flattery,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why dost thou tip men’s tongues with golden words</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And peise their deeds with weight of heavy lead,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That fair performance cannot follow promise?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>O, that a man might hold the heart’s close book,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And choke the lavish tongue when it doth utter</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The breath of falsehood not character’d there!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Far be it from the honour of my age</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I should owe bright gold and render lead!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Age is a cynic, not a flatterer:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I say again, that, if I knew your grief,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And that by me it may be lessened,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My proper harm should buy your highness’ good.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>These are the vulgar tenders of false men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That never pay the duty of their words.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou wilt not stick to swear what thou hast said;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But, when thou know’st my grief’s condition,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This rash-disgorged vomit of thy word</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou wilt eat up again, and leave me helpless.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>By Heaven, I will not, though your majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Did bid me run upon your sword and die.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Say, that my grief is no way med’cinable,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But by the loss and bruising of thine honour?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>If nothing but that loss may vantage you,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I would account that loss my vantage too.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Think’st that thou canst unswear thy oath again?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>I cannot; nor I would not, if I could.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>But, if thou dost, what shall I say to thee?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What may be said to any perjur’d villain</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That breaks the sacred warrant of an oath.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>What wilt thou say to one that breaks an oath?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That he hath broke his faith with God and man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And from them both stands excommunicate.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What office were it to suggest a man</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To break a lawful and religious vow?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td>An office for the devil, not for man.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That devil’s office must thou do for me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or break thy oath or cancel all the bonds</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of love and duty ’twixt thyself and me.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And therefore, Warwick, if thou art thyself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lord and master of thy word and oath,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go to thy daughter, and in my behalf</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Command her, woo her, win her any ways,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be my mistress and my secret love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I will not stand to hear thee make reply;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy oath break hers, or let thy sovereign die. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O doting king! O detestable office!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Well may I tempt myself to wrong myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When he hath sworn me by the name of God</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To break a vow made by the name of God.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What if I swear by this right hand of mine</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To cut this right hand off? the better way</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Were to profane the idol than confound it:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But neither will I do; I’ll keep mine oath</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to my daughter make a recantation</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of all the virtue I have preach’d to her.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll say, she must forget her husband Salisbury,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>If she remember to embrace the king;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll say, an oath may easily be broken,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not so easily pardon’d, being broken;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll say, it is true charity to love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not true love to be so charitable;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll say, his greatness may bear out the shame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not his kingdom can buy out the sin;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll say, it is my duty to persuade,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But not her honesty to give consent.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>See, where she comes: was never father, had</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Against his child an embassage so bad.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My lord and father, I have sought for you:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My mother and the peers importune you</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To keep in presence of his majesty</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And do your best to make his highness merry.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>How shall I enter in this arrant errand?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I must not call her child; for where’s the father</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That will, in such a suit, seduce his child?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then, Wife of Salisbury⁠—shall I so begin?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, he’s my friend; and where is found the friend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That will do friendship such indammagement?⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b>.</i> Neither my daughter, nor my dear friend’s wife,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am not Warwick, as thou think’st I am,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But an attorney from the court of hell;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That thus have hous’d my spirit in his form,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To do a message to thee from the king.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The mighty King of England dotes on thee:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He that hath power to take away thy life</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath power to take thine honour; then consent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To pawn thine honour, rather than thy life:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Honour is often lost and got again;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But life, once gone, hath no recovery.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sun, that withers hay, doth nourish grass;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king that would distain thee will advance thee.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The poets write that great Achilles’ spear</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Could heal the wound it made: the moral is,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What mighty men misdo, they can amend.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The lion doth become his bloody jaws</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And grace his foragement, by being mild</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When vassel fear lies trembling at his feet.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king will in his glory hide thy shame;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And those that gaze on him to find out thee</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will lose their eyesight, looking in the sun.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What can one drop of poison harm the sea,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Whose hugy vastures can digest the ill</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And make it lose his operation?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king’s great name will temper thy misdeeds,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And give the bitter potion of reproach</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A sugar’d-sweet and most delicious taste:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Besides, it is no harm, to do the thing</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which without shame could not be left undone.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thus have I, in his majesty’s behalf,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Apparell’d sin in virtuous sentences,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And dwell upon thy answer in his suit.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Unnatural besiege! Woe me unhappy,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To have escap’d the danger of my foes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And to be ten times worse envir’d by friends!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath he no means to stain my honest blood,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But to corrupt the author of my blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be his scandalous and vile solicitor?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No marvel, though the branches be then infected,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When poison hath encompassed the root:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No marvel, though the leprous infant die,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When the stern dam envenometh the dug.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Why then, give sin a passport to offend,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And youth the dangerous rein of liberty:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Blot out the strict forbidding of the law;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And cancel every canon, that prescribes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A shame for shame or penance for offence.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>No, let me die, if his too boist’rous will</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will have it so, before I will consent</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be an actor in his graceless lust.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Warwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, now thou speak’st as I would have thee speak:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And mark how I unsay my words again.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An honourable grave is more esteem’d,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than the polluted closet of a king:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The greater man, the greater is the thing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Be it good or bad, that he shall undertake:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An unreputed mote, flying in the sun,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Presents a greater substance than it is:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The freshest summer’s day doth soonest taint</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The loathed carrion that it seems to kiss:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Deep are the blows made with a mighty axe:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That sin doth ten times aggravate itself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That is committed in a holy place:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>An evil deed, done by authority,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Is sin and subornation: deck an ape</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In tissue, and the beauty of the robe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Adds but the greater scorn unto the beast.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>A spacious field of reasons could I urge</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Between his glory, daughter, and thy shame:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That poison shows worst in a golden cup;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dark night seems darker by the lightning-flash;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And every glory that inclines to sin,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The shame is treble by the opposite.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So leave I, with my blessing in thy bosom;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which then convert to a most heavy curse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When thou convert’st from honour’s golden name</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To the black faction of bed-blotting shame! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I’ll follow thee; and when my mind turns so,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My body sink my soul in endless woe! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
			<section id="scene-2-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Scene</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
				<p>The same. A room in the castle.</p>
				<table>
					<tbody>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>, meeting.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thrice-noble Audley, well encounter’d here:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>How is it with our sovereign and his peers?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>’Tis full a fortnight since I saw his highness,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What time he sent me forth to muster men;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which I accordingly have done, and bring them hither</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In fair array before his majesty.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>What news, my Lord of Derby, from the Emperor?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>As good as we desire: the Emperor</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath yielded to his highness friendly aid;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And makes our king lieutenant-general</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In all his lands and large dominions:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Then via for the spacious bounds of France!</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>What, doth his highness leap to hear these news?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have not yet found time to open them;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The king is in his closet, malcontent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For what, I know not, but he gave in charge,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till after dinner, none should interrupt him:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Countess Salisbury, and her father Warwick,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Artois, and all, look underneath the brows.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>Undoubtedly then some thing is amiss. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trumpet within.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>The trumpets sound; the king is now abroad.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>Here comes his highness.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>Befall my sovereign all my sovereign’s wish!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Ah, that thou wert a witch, to make it so!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>The emperor greeteth you: <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Presenting letters.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Would it were the countess!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>And hath accorded to your highness’ suit.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Thou liest, she hath not; but I would, she had!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>All love and duty to my lord the king!</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Well, all but one is none:⁠—what news with you?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have, my liege, levied those horse and foot,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>According to your charge, and brought them hither.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Then let those foot trudge hence upon those horse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>According to our discharge, and be gone.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Derby,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I’ll look upon the countess’ mind anon.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>The countess’ mind, my liege?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>I mean the emperor: leave me alone.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</td>
							<td>What’s in his mind?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</td>
							<td>Let’s leave him to his humour. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Derby</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Audley</b>.</i></td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thus from the heart’s abundance speaks the tongue;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Countess for emperor: and, indeed, why not?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She is as imperator over me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I to her</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Am as a kneeling vassal that observes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The pleasure or displeasure of her eye.⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What says the more than Cleopatra’s match</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To Caesar now?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>That yet, my liege, ere night</span>
									<br/>
									<span>She will resolve your majesty. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drum within.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>What drum is this, that thunders forth this march,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To start the tender Cupid in my bosom?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Poor sheep-skin, how it brawls with him that beateth it!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, break the thund’ring parchment-bottom out,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And I will teach it to conduct sweet lines</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unto the bosom of a heavenly nymph:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For I will use it as my writing-paper;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And so reduce him, from a scolding drum,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To be the herald and dear counsel-bearer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Betwixt a goddess and a mighty king.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, bid the drummer learn to touch the lute,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or hang him in the braces of his drum;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For now we think it an uncivil thing,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To trouble heaven with such harsh resounds:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away.⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>The quarrel, that I have, requires no arms</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But these of mine; and these shall meet my foe</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In a deep march of penetrable groans:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My eyes shall be my arrows; and my sighs</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall serve me as the vantage of the wind,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To whirl away my sweet’st artillery:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Ah but, alas, she wins the sun of me,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For that is she herself; and thence it comes</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That poets term the wanton warrior blind;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But love hath eyes as judgement to his steps,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Till too-much-loved glory dazzles them.⁠—</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>How now?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My liege, the drum that stroke the lusty march</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stands with Prince Edward, your thrice-valiant son.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b> retires to the door.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I see the boy. O, how his mother’s face,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Modell’d in his, corrects my stray’d desire</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And rates my heart and chides my thievish eye;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who being rich enough in seeing her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Yet seeks elsewhere: and basest theft is that,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which cannot cloak itself on poverty.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, boy, what news?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>I have assembled, my dear lord and father,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The choicest buds of all our English blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For our affairs in France; and here we come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To take direction from your majesty.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Still do I see in him delineate</span>
									<br/>
									<span>His mother’s visage; those his eyes are hers,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who looking wistly on me make me blush;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For faults against themselves give evidence:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Lust is a fire; and men, like lanthorns, show</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Light lust within themselves, even through themselves.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Away, loose silks of wavering vanity!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall the large limit of fair Brittany</span>
									<br/>
									<span>By me be overthrown? and shall I not</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Master this little mansion of myself?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Give me an armour of eternal steel;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I go to conquer kings; and shall I then</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Subdue myself and be my enemy’s friend?</span>
									<br/>
									<span>It must not be.⁠—Come, boy, forward, advance!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let’s with our colours sweet the air of France.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My liege, the countess with a smiling cheer</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Desires access unto your majesty. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Advancing from the door, and whispering to him.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Why, there it goes! that very smile of hers</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Hath ransom’d captive France, and set the king,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The Dauphin, and the peers, at liberty.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, leave me, Ned, and revel with thy friends. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thy mother is but black; and thou, like her,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Dost put into my mind how foul she is.⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Go, fetch the countess hither in thy hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And let her chase away these winter clouds;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For she gives beauty both to heaven and earth. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>The sin is more to hack and hew poor men,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than to embrace in an unlawful bed</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The register of all rarieties</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Since leathern Adam till this youngest hour.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Re-enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>, with the <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Go, Lodwick, put thy hand into my purse,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Play, spend, give, riot, waste; do what thou wilt,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>So thou wilt hence a while and leave me here. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lodwick</b>.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Now, my soul’s playfellow! art thou come,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To speak the more than heavenly word of <em>yea</em></span>
									<br/>
									<span>To my objection in thy beauteous love?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td>My father on his blessing hath commanded⁠—</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>That thou shalt yield to me?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td>Ay, dear my liege, your due.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>And that, my dearest love, can be no less</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than right for right and tender love for love.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Than wrong for wrong and endless hate for hate.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But⁠—sith I see your majesty so bent,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That my unwillingness, my husband’s love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your high estate, nor no respect respected</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can be my help, but that your mightiness</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Will overbear and awe these dear regards⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I bind my discontent to my content,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And what I would not, I’ll compel I will;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Provided that yourself remove those lets</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That stand between your highness’ love and mine.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Name them, fair countess, and, by Heaven, I will.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>It is their lives, that stand between our love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That I would have chok’d up, my sovereign.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Whose lives, my lady?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>My thrice-loving liege,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Your queen, and Salisbury my wedded husband;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Who living have that title in our love</span>
									<br/>
									<span>That we can not bestow but by their death.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>Thy opposition is beyond our Law.</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>So is your desire: if the law</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Can hinder you to execute the one,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Let it forbid you to attempt the other:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I cannot think you love me as you say</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Unless you do make good what you have sworn.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>No more; thy husband and the queen shall die.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Fairer thou art by far than Hero was;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Beardless Leander not so strong as I:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>He swum an easy current for his love;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>But I will through a Hellespont of blood</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To arrive at Sestos where my Hero lies.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Nay, you’ll do more; you’ll make the river, too,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>With their heart-bloods that keep our love asunder,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of which my husband and your wife are twain.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Thy beauty makes them guilty of their death</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And gives in evidence that they shall die;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Upon which verdict, I, their judge, condemn them.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>O perjur’d beauty! more corrupted judge!</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When to the great star-chamber o’er our heads</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The universal sessions calls to count</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This packing evil, we both shall tremble for it.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td>What says my fair love? is she resolute?</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Countess</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Resolv’d to be dissolv’d; and, therefore, this⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Keep but thy word, great king, and I am thine.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stand where thou dost, I’ll part a little from thee,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And see how I will yield me to thy hands. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turning suddenly upon him, and showing two daggers.</i></span>
									<br/>
									<span>Here by my side doth hang my wedding knifes:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Take thou the one and with it kill thy queen</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And learn by me to find her where she lies;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And with this other I’ll dispatch my love,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which now lies fast asleep within my heart:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>When they are gone, then I’ll consent to love.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Stir not, lascivious king, to hinder me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My resolution is more nimbler far</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Than thy prevention can be in my rescue,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And, if thou stir, I strike: therefore stand still,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And hear the choice that I will put thee to:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Either swear to leave thy most unholy suit,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>And never henceforth to solicit me;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or else, by Heaven, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">kneeling</i> this sharp-pointed knife</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Shall stain thy earth with that which thou wouldst stain,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My poor chaste blood. Swear, Edward, swear,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Or I will strike and die before thee here.</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td epub:type="z3998:persona">King Edward</td>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Even by that Power I swear, that gives me now</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The power to be ashamed of myself,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I never mean to part my lips again</span>
									<br/>
									<span>In any words that tends to such a suit.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arise, true English Lady, whom our isle</span>
									<br/>
									<span>May better boast of, than e’er Roman might</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Of her, whose ransack’d treasury hath task’d</span>
									<br/>
									<span>The vain endeavour of so many pens:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Arise; and be my fault thy honour’s fame,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Which after-ages shall enrich thee with.</span>
									<br/>
									<span>I am awaked from this idle dream;⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Warwick, my son, Derby, Artois, and Audley,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Brave warriors all, where are you all this while?</span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td>
								<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Prince</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lords</b>.</i>
							</td>
						</tr>
						<tr>
							<td/>
							<td epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>Warwick, I make thee Warden of the North:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Thou, Prince of Wales, and Audley, straight to sea;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Scour to Newhaven; some there stay for me:⁠—</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Myself, Artois, and Derby, will through Flanders</span>
									<br/>
									<span>To greet our friends there and to crave their aide:</span>
									<br/>
									<span>This night will scarce suffice me, to discover</span>
									<br/>
									<span>My folly’s siege against a faithful lover;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>For, ere the sun shall gild the eastern sky,</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll wake him with our martial harmony. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exeunt.</i></span>
								</p>
							</td>
						</tr>
					</tbody>
				</table>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
